# Bunode wrapper core (Rust)

We provide node-compatible API, and the binary will call underlying Bun.

The binary is a CLI based on clap, mock Node.js's behavior as much as possible.

`node` is the only expected filename for that binary.

## Calling underlying Bun

The underlying Bun binary's location is certain.

On Windows, it's always `./bun/bun.exe` resolved relative to the binary location.

On Linux and macOS, it's always `../bun/bun` resolved relative to the binary location.

It's mainly designed for future tarball releasing.

## Behavior

### Version control

Bun itself has a masqueraded Node.js version, we can get it from running `bun -p "process.version"`

To keep Bun's semver semantic, we use a hacky but effective way: add a build metadata mark to Bun's own compatible-layer version.

For example: `bun v1.4.0` -> `bun -p "process.version" v26.3.0` `node v26.3.0+bun.1.4.0` (Bunode)

So if developers define `package.json#engines.node` like `>=22.18.0` or `^26.2.0`, it will keep Bunode usable.

The version is injected in `node --version`, registry and other places needs version.

We won't modify `node -p "process.version"`'s version result, we will keep it as is for internal checking to avoid confusion.

The only problem is that flag will be ignored when comparing the version (`v26.3.0+bun.1.4.0` `v26.3.0+bun.1.3.8` has completely the same priority). So it requires developers to declare its version precisely.

### `node` direct calls

We wrap `bun repl`.

We can't make the behavior 100% compatible but it is basically similar. Considering this feature is mainly for human to call, so I think it's not a big deal.

For CI and non-TTY environment, Node.js executes stdin instead of starting the REPL. We follow its behavior as well by using `bun run -` (The same arguments as the explanation below)

### `node [options] [ script.js ] [arguments]`

We wrap `bun run --no-install --no-env-file` for the script running.

Considering `bun run` can also trigger tasks in `package.json`, we prepend a `./` (`.\` on Windows) for pure script name (without any `/`, `\` in windows).

For node options, we will try to translate them to buns or wrap as much as possible, as well as Node's environment variables. For `NODE_OPTIONS`, we follow the same translating method and handle priority the same as Node does.

### Bun-specific options

We hope users are able to control Bun's behavior.

For the options / flags that Node.js doesn't directly have, we use a `--bun` prefix. For example, `--bun-config` to specific which `bunfig.toml` is to use.

### Preload

Different from Node.js, Bun's `process` object is mutable. It gives us room to modify misleading metadata like `process.execPath` and `process.argv0`.

For directly call mode in non-TTY environment, `process.argv[1]` will also be `-`, we need to remove it as well.

The preload can be injected with `bun --preload`, the preload JavaScript file will be generated by bunode(`node`) binary, next to `bun` executable binary.

### Help document

In `node --help`, we only print supported options, including bun specific translated options. And avoid printing unsupported options, environment variables and subcommands.

We can warn / error to these flags if users call them. But they should not be put in the help document to confuse users.

## Non Goal

### Modifying output

Bun's output system (error rendering, repl interactive logic) is quite different from Node.js's. It's difficult and meaningless to make the output completely the same. Most cases, output is for humans and agents to read, and Bun's output is readable.

Modifying output needs PTY handling, which will bring complexity and decreased performance. We need to leave more effort to focus on input compatibility.

However, there does have some misleading output, like Bun version tags and brand output in syntax errors. It may confuse AI agents. This may be a trade-off that cannot be resolved in the short term.

### CLI 100% compatibility

Node.js CLI has some flags used to customize V8 engine behavior, and have some features which Bun is missing (like interactive inspect CLI). We only translate flags and options that we can find the corresponding ones.

For unsupported options, we determine whether to warn(ignore) or error(panic) based on the specific circumstances.

For example:

```
bunode: `node inspect` is not supported because Bun does not provide Node's built-in CLI debugger.
Use `node --inspect` / `node --inspect-brk` compatible flags instead.

tips: Bunode is a Node.js compatibility layer for Bun. Your using Node.js v26.3.0+bun.1.4.0 is actually based on Bun v1.4.0.
```

Different bun versions may also have different levels of Node.js compatibility, we change the detail behavior based on Bun's real version in codebase.

## Project layout

This is only for reference, it needn't be strict followed. And this part should be removed while the feature is done. (For future maintaining)

```tree
crates/bunode/src
├── preload
│   ├── mod.rs           # Expose the way to inject `--prefix` flag and the file, generate preload files.
│   ├── minify.rs        # Build time macro, reprint and minify the preload with Oxc, don't read the file at runtime.
│   └── preload.js       # The preload, will be checked by Vite+, can disable some lint rules for minimal size.
├── base                 # The option translating, error, panic and warn handling (CORE PART)
│   ├── mod.rs           # We plan to support Bun v1.3.14 as the baseline.
│   ├── help.rs
│   └── ...              # About the project layout there, I don't have a certain idea
│                        # Maybe we should divide options / env vars to different categories (by level of compatibility)
│                        # We'd better to make an extendable system, so we can handle Bun's future release
│
├── version.rs           # Handle version (According to the document above)
├── bun.rs               # Call the underlying bun binary
├── cli.rs               # Define Bun-version unrelated universal CLI options and CLI parser
│                        # At the moment, cli.rs only defines CLI options struct.
│                        # But for the future integration, there are options we can't make sure directly, and
│                        # some is available on one version and unavailable in another version. So you need to
│                        # refactor it as an Vec based, and parse and handle the options on our own side.
│
└── main.rs              # The entry of the program
```
